docs/user_manual/source/debug.rst, before:

.. _debug-support:

Debug & Trigger
===============

|corev| offers support for execution-based debug according to [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. The main requirements for the core are described in Chapter 4: RISC-V Debug, Chapter 5: Trigger Module, and Appendix A.2: Execution Based.

The following list shows the simplified overview of events that occur in the core when debug is requested:

 #. Enters Debug Mode
 #. Saves the PC to ``dpc``
 #. Updates the cause in ``dcsr``
 #. Points the PC to the location determined by the input port ``dm_haltaddr_i``
 #. Begins executing debug control code


Debug Mode can be entered by one of the following conditions:

 - External debug event using the ``debug_req_i`` signal
 - Trigger Module match event with ``tdata1.action`` set to 1
 - ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 1 (see :ref:`ebreak_behavior` below)

A user wishing to perform an abstract access, whereby the user can observe or control a core’s GPR or CSR register from the hart, is done by invoking debug control code to move values to and from internal registers to an externally addressable Debug Module (DM). Using this execution-based debug allows for the reduction of the overall number of debug interface signals.

.. note::

   Debug support in |corev| is only one of the components needed to build a System on Chip design with run-control debug support (think "the ability to attach GDB to a core over JTAG").
   Additionally, a Debug Module and a Debug Transport Module, compliant with [RISC-V-DEBUG]_, are needed.

   A supported open source implementation of these building blocks can be found in the `RISC-V Debug Support for PULP Cores IP block <https://github.com/pulp-platform/riscv-dbg/>`_.

The |corev| also supports a Trigger Module to enable entry into Debug Mode on a trigger event with the following features:

 - Number of trigger register(s): Parametrizable number of triggers using parameter ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS``.
 - Supported trigger types: Execute/load/store address match (Match Control) and exception trigger.

The compare value used to determine an execute address match is the PC of the instruction, i.e. only the lowest virtual address
of the instruction is used. The compare value(s) used to determine a load/store address match depend(s) on the size of the transferred
data item as well as the lowest virtual address of the access. A byte load/store for address ``A`` only uses ``A`` as compare value; a
halfword load/store for address ``A`` uses ``A`` and ``A+1`` as compare values; a word load/store for address ``A`` uses ``A``, ``A+1``,
``A+2`` and ``A+3`` as compare values.

A trigger match will cause debug entry if ``tdata1.ACTION`` is 1.

The |corev| will not support the optional debug features 10, 11, & 12 listed in Section 4.1 of [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. Specifically, a control transfer instruction's destination location being in or out of the Program Buffer and instructions depending on PC value shall **not** cause an illegal instruction.

Interface
---------

.. table::
  :widths: 20 10 70
  :class: no-scrollbar-table

  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | Signal                        | Direction | Description                                |
  +===============================+===========+============================================+
  | ``debug_req_i``               | input     | Request to enter Debug Mode                |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_havereset_o``         | output    | Debug status: Core has been reset          |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_running_o``           | output    | Debug status: Core is running              |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_halted_o``            | output    | Debug status: Core is halted               |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``dm_halt_addr_i[31:0]``      | input     | Address for debugger entry                 |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``dm_exception_addr_i[31:0]`` | input     | Address for debugger exception entry       |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+

``debug_req_i`` is the "debug interrupt", issued by the debug module when the core should enter Debug Mode. The ``debug_req_i`` is synchronous to ``clk_i`` and requires a minimum assertion of one clock period to enter Debug Mode. The instruction being decoded during the same cycle that ``debug_req_i`` is first asserted shall not be executed before entering Debug Mode.

``debug_havereset_o``, ``debug_running_o``, and ``debug_mode_o`` signals provide the operational status of the core to the debug module. The assertion of these
signals is mutually exclusive.

``debug_havereset_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| has been reset. ``debug_havereset_o`` is set high during the assertion of ``rst_ni``. It will be
cleared low a few (unspecified) cycles after ``rst_ni`` has been deasserted **and** ``fetch_enable_i`` has been sampled high.

``debug_running_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| is running normally.

``debug_halted_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| is in debug mode.

``dm_halt_addr_i`` is the address where the PC jumps to for a debug entry event. When in Debug Mode, an ebreak instruction will also cause the PC to jump back to this address without affecting status registers. (see :ref:`ebreak_behavior` below)

``dm_exception_addr_i`` is the address where the PC jumps to when an exception occurs during Debug Mode. When in Debug Mode, the ``mret`` and ``ecall`` instructions will also cause the PC to jump back to this address without affecting status registers.

Both ``dm_halt_addr_i`` and ``dm_exception_addr_i`` must be word aligned.

Core Debug Registers
--------------------

|corev| implements four core debug registers, namely :ref:`csr-dcsr`, :ref:`csr-dpc`, and two debug scratch registers. Access to these registers in non Debug Mode results in an illegal instruction.

The trigger related CSRs (``tselect``, ``tdata1``, ``tdata2``, ``tdata3``, ``tinfo``, ``tcontrol``) are only included if ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS`` is
set to a value greater than 0. Further descriptions of these CSRs can be found in :ref:`csr-tselect`, :ref:`csr-tdata1`, :ref:`csr-tdata2`, :ref:`csr-tdata3`,
:ref:`csr-tinfo`, :ref:`csr-tcontrol` and [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. The optional ``mcontext`` and ``mscontext`` CSRs are not implemented.

If ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS`` is 0, access to the trigger registers will result in an illegal instruction exception.

The ``tdata1.DMODE`` bitfield controls write access permission to the currently selected triggers ``tdata*`` registers. In |corev| this bit is tied to 1, and thus only debug mode is able to write to the trigger registers.

Debug state
-----------

As specified in RISC-V Debug Specification ([RISC-V-DEBUG]_) every hart that can be selected by
the Debug Module is in exactly one of four states: ``nonexistent``, ``unavailable``, ``running`` or ``halted``.

The remainder of this section assumes that the |corev| will not be classified as ``nonexistent`` by the integrator.

The |corev| signals to the Debug Module whether it is ``running`` or ``halted`` via its ``debug_running_o`` and ``debug_halted_o`` pins
respectively. Therefore, assuming that this core will not be integrated as a ``nonexistent`` core, the |corev| is classified as ``unavailable``
when neither ``debug_running_o`` or ``debug_halted_o`` is asserted. Upon ``rst_ni`` assertion the debug state will be ``unavailable`` until some
cycle(s) after ``rst_ni`` has been deasserted and ``fetch_enable_i`` has been sampled high. After this point (until a next reset assertion) the
core will transition between having its ``debug_halted_o`` or ``debug_running_o`` pin asserted depending whether the core is in debug mode or not.
Exactly one of the ``debug_havereset_o``, ``debug_running_o``, ``debug_halted_o`` is asserted at all times.

:numref:`debug-running` and show :numref:`debug-halted` show typical examples of transitioning into the ``running`` and ``halted`` states.

.. figure:: ../images/debug_running.svg
   :name: debug-running
   :align: center
   :alt:

   Transition into debug ``running`` state

.. figure:: ../images/debug_halted.svg
   :name: debug-halted
   :align: center
   :alt:

   Transition into debug ``halted`` state

The key properties of the debug states are:

 * The |corev| can remain in its ``unavailable`` state for an arbitrarily long time (depending on ``rst_ni`` and ``fetch_enable_i``).
 * If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted after ``rst_ni`` deassertion and before or coincident with the assertion of ``fetch_enable_i``, then the |corev|
   is guaranteed to transition straight from its ``unavailable`` state into its ``halted`` state. If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted at a later
   point in time, then the |corev| might transition through the ``running`` state on its ways to the ``halted`` state.
 * If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted during the ``running`` state, the core will eventually transition into the ``halted`` state (typically after a couple of cycles).

.. _ebreak_behavior:

EBREAK Behavior
---------------

The ``ebreak`` instruction description is distributed across several RISC-V specifications:  [RISC-V-DEBUG]_,
[RISC-V-PRIV]_, [RISC-V-UNPRIV]_. The following is a summary of the behavior for three common scenarios.

Scenario 1 : Enter Exception
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when the core is **not** in Debug Mode and ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 0 shall result in the following actions:

 - The core enters the exception handler routine located at ``mtvec`` (Debug Mode is not entered)
 - ``mepc`` and ``mcause`` are updated

To properly return from the exception, the ebreak handler will need to increment the ``mepc`` to the next instruction. This requires querying the size of the ``ebreak`` instruction that was used to enter the exception (16 bit ``c.ebreak`` or 32 bit ``ebreak``).

.. note::

   |corev| does not support ``mtval`` CSR register which would have saved the value of the instruction for exceptions.

Scenario 2 : Enter Debug Mode
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when the core is **not** in Debug Mode and ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 1 shall result in the following actions:

- The core enters Debug Mode and starts executing debug code located at ``dm_halt_addr_i`` (exception routine not called)
- ``dpc`` and ``dcsr`` are updated

Similar to the exception scenario above, the debugger will need to increment the ``dpc`` to the next instruction before returning from Debug Mode.

.. note::

   The default value of ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` is 0 and the ``dcsr`` is only accessible in Debug Mode. To enter Debug Mode from ``ebreak``, the user will first need to enter Debug Mode through some other means,
   such as from the external ``debug_req_i``, and set ``dcsr.EBREAKM``.

Scenario 3 : Exit Program Buffer & Restart Debug Code
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction when the core is in Debug Mode shall result in the following actions:

- The core remains in Debug Mode and execution jumps back to the beginning of the debug code located at ``dm_halt_addr_i``
- None of the CSRs are modified

Commit message:

Made mseccfg hardwired to 0x0 if PMP_NUM_REGIONS = 0. Added note that execution based debug requires that the Debug Module is located in a PMA main region.
Signed-off-by: Arjan Bink <Arjan.Bink@silabs.com>

docs/user_manual/source/debug.rst, after:

.. _debug-support:

Debug & Trigger
===============

|corev| offers support for execution-based debug according to [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. The main requirements for the core are described in Chapter 4: RISC-V Debug, Chapter 5: Trigger Module, and Appendix A.2: Execution Based.

.. note::

   As execution based debug is used, the Debug Module (with code entry points defined by ``dm_halt_addr_i`` and ``dm_exception_addr_i``) needs to be located
   in a memory region that supports code execution. This therefore (at least) requires that the related memory region is marked as Main in the PMA (:ref:`pma`), which
   is the default behavior if the PMA is deconfigured.

The following list shows the simplified overview of events that occur in the core when debug is requested:

 #. Enters Debug Mode
 #. Saves the PC to ``dpc``
 #. Updates the cause in ``dcsr``
 #. Points the PC to the location determined by the input port ``dm_haltaddr_i``
 #. Begins executing debug control code


Debug Mode can be entered by one of the following conditions:

 - External debug event using the ``debug_req_i`` signal
 - Trigger Module match event with ``tdata1.action`` set to 1
 - ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 1 (see :ref:`ebreak_behavior` below)

A user wishing to perform an abstract access, whereby the user can observe or control a core’s GPR or CSR register from the hart, is done by invoking debug control code to move values to and from internal registers to an externally addressable Debug Module (DM). Using this execution-based debug allows for the reduction of the overall number of debug interface signals.

.. note::

   Debug support in |corev| is only one of the components needed to build a System on Chip design with run-control debug support (think "the ability to attach GDB to a core over JTAG").
   Additionally, a Debug Module and a Debug Transport Module, compliant with [RISC-V-DEBUG]_, are needed.

   A supported open source implementation of these building blocks can be found in the `RISC-V Debug Support for PULP Cores IP block <https://github.com/pulp-platform/riscv-dbg/>`_.

The |corev| also supports a Trigger Module to enable entry into Debug Mode on a trigger event with the following features:

 - Number of trigger register(s): Parametrizable number of triggers using parameter ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS``.
 - Supported trigger types: Execute/load/store address match (Match Control) and exception trigger.

The compare value used to determine an execute address match is the PC of the instruction, i.e. only the lowest virtual address
of the instruction is used. The compare value(s) used to determine a load/store address match depend(s) on the size of the transferred
data item as well as the lowest virtual address of the access. A byte load/store for address ``A`` only uses ``A`` as compare value; a
halfword load/store for address ``A`` uses ``A`` and ``A+1`` as compare values; a word load/store for address ``A`` uses ``A``, ``A+1``,
``A+2`` and ``A+3`` as compare values.

A trigger match will cause debug entry if ``tdata1.ACTION`` is 1.

The |corev| will not support the optional debug features 10, 11, & 12 listed in Section 4.1 of [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. Specifically, a control transfer instruction's destination location being in or out of the Program Buffer and instructions depending on PC value shall **not** cause an illegal instruction.

Interface
---------

.. table::
  :widths: 20 10 70
  :class: no-scrollbar-table

  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | Signal                        | Direction | Description                                |
  +===============================+===========+============================================+
  | ``debug_req_i``               | input     | Request to enter Debug Mode                |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_havereset_o``         | output    | Debug status: Core has been reset          |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_running_o``           | output    | Debug status: Core is running              |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``debug_halted_o``            | output    | Debug status: Core is halted               |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``dm_halt_addr_i[31:0]``      | input     | Address for debugger entry                 |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+
  | ``dm_exception_addr_i[31:0]`` | input     | Address for debugger exception entry       |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+--------------------------------------------+

``debug_req_i`` is the "debug interrupt", issued by the debug module when the core should enter Debug Mode. The ``debug_req_i`` is synchronous to ``clk_i`` and requires a minimum assertion of one clock period to enter Debug Mode. The instruction being decoded during the same cycle that ``debug_req_i`` is first asserted shall not be executed before entering Debug Mode.

``debug_havereset_o``, ``debug_running_o``, and ``debug_mode_o`` signals provide the operational status of the core to the debug module. The assertion of these
signals is mutually exclusive.

``debug_havereset_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| has been reset. ``debug_havereset_o`` is set high during the assertion of ``rst_ni``. It will be
cleared low a few (unspecified) cycles after ``rst_ni`` has been deasserted **and** ``fetch_enable_i`` has been sampled high.

``debug_running_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| is running normally.

``debug_halted_o`` is used to signal that the |corev| is in debug mode.

``dm_halt_addr_i`` is the address where the PC jumps to for a debug entry event. When in Debug Mode, an ebreak instruction will also cause the PC to jump back to this address without affecting status registers. (see :ref:`ebreak_behavior` below)

``dm_exception_addr_i`` is the address where the PC jumps to when an exception occurs during Debug Mode. When in Debug Mode, the ``mret`` and ``ecall`` instructions will also cause the PC to jump back to this address without affecting status registers.

Both ``dm_halt_addr_i`` and ``dm_exception_addr_i`` must be word aligned.

Core Debug Registers
--------------------

|corev| implements four core debug registers, namely :ref:`csr-dcsr`, :ref:`csr-dpc`, and two debug scratch registers. Access to these registers in non Debug Mode results in an illegal instruction.

The trigger related CSRs (``tselect``, ``tdata1``, ``tdata2``, ``tdata3``, ``tinfo``, ``tcontrol``) are only included if ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS`` is
set to a value greater than 0. Further descriptions of these CSRs can be found in :ref:`csr-tselect`, :ref:`csr-tdata1`, :ref:`csr-tdata2`, :ref:`csr-tdata3`,
:ref:`csr-tinfo`, :ref:`csr-tcontrol` and [RISC-V-DEBUG]_. The optional ``mcontext`` and ``mscontext`` CSRs are not implemented.

If ``DBG_NUM_TRIGGERS`` is 0, access to the trigger registers will result in an illegal instruction exception.

The ``tdata1.DMODE`` bitfield controls write access permission to the currently selected triggers ``tdata*`` registers. In |corev| this bit is tied to 1, and thus only debug mode is able to write to the trigger registers.

Debug state
-----------

As specified in RISC-V Debug Specification ([RISC-V-DEBUG]_) every hart that can be selected by
the Debug Module is in exactly one of four states: ``nonexistent``, ``unavailable``, ``running`` or ``halted``.

The remainder of this section assumes that the |corev| will not be classified as ``nonexistent`` by the integrator.

The |corev| signals to the Debug Module whether it is ``running`` or ``halted`` via its ``debug_running_o`` and ``debug_halted_o`` pins
respectively. Therefore, assuming that this core will not be integrated as a ``nonexistent`` core, the |corev| is classified as ``unavailable``
when neither ``debug_running_o`` or ``debug_halted_o`` is asserted. Upon ``rst_ni`` assertion the debug state will be ``unavailable`` until some
cycle(s) after ``rst_ni`` has been deasserted and ``fetch_enable_i`` has been sampled high. After this point (until a next reset assertion) the
core will transition between having its ``debug_halted_o`` or ``debug_running_o`` pin asserted depending whether the core is in debug mode or not.
Exactly one of the ``debug_havereset_o``, ``debug_running_o``, ``debug_halted_o`` is asserted at all times.

:numref:`debug-running` and show :numref:`debug-halted` show typical examples of transitioning into the ``running`` and ``halted`` states.

.. figure:: ../images/debug_running.svg
   :name: debug-running
   :align: center
   :alt:

   Transition into debug ``running`` state

.. figure:: ../images/debug_halted.svg
   :name: debug-halted
   :align: center
   :alt:

   Transition into debug ``halted`` state

The key properties of the debug states are:

 * The |corev| can remain in its ``unavailable`` state for an arbitrarily long time (depending on ``rst_ni`` and ``fetch_enable_i``).
 * If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted after ``rst_ni`` deassertion and before or coincident with the assertion of ``fetch_enable_i``, then the |corev|
   is guaranteed to transition straight from its ``unavailable`` state into its ``halted`` state. If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted at a later
   point in time, then the |corev| might transition through the ``running`` state on its ways to the ``halted`` state.
 * If ``debug_req_i`` is asserted during the ``running`` state, the core will eventually transition into the ``halted`` state (typically after a couple of cycles).

.. _ebreak_behavior:

EBREAK Behavior
---------------

The ``ebreak`` instruction description is distributed across several RISC-V specifications:  [RISC-V-DEBUG]_,
[RISC-V-PRIV]_, [RISC-V-UNPRIV]_. The following is a summary of the behavior for three common scenarios.

Scenario 1 : Enter Exception
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when the core is **not** in Debug Mode and ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 0 shall result in the following actions:

 - The core enters the exception handler routine located at ``mtvec`` (Debug Mode is not entered)
 - ``mepc`` and ``mcause`` are updated

To properly return from the exception, the ebreak handler will need to increment the ``mepc`` to the next instruction. This requires querying the size of the ``ebreak`` instruction that was used to enter the exception (16 bit ``c.ebreak`` or 32 bit ``ebreak``).

.. note::

   |corev| does not support ``mtval`` CSR register which would have saved the value of the instruction for exceptions.

Scenario 2 : Enter Debug Mode
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction in machine mode when the core is **not** in Debug Mode and ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` == 1 shall result in the following actions:

- The core enters Debug Mode and starts executing debug code located at ``dm_halt_addr_i`` (exception routine not called)
- ``dpc`` and ``dcsr`` are updated

Similar to the exception scenario above, the debugger will need to increment the ``dpc`` to the next instruction before returning from Debug Mode.

.. note::

   The default value of ``dcsr.EBREAKM`` is 0 and the ``dcsr`` is only accessible in Debug Mode. To enter Debug Mode from ``ebreak``, the user will first need to enter Debug Mode through some other means,
   such as from the external ``debug_req_i``, and set ``dcsr.EBREAKM``.

Scenario 3 : Exit Program Buffer & Restart Debug Code
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Executing the ``ebreak`` instruction when the core is in Debug Mode shall result in the following actions:

- The core remains in Debug Mode and execution jumps back to the beginning of the debug code located at ``dm_halt_addr_i``
- None of the CSRs are modified
